[Music]
towards the end of the 13th century
around the year 1293 the Venetian
Explorer and adventurer Marco Polo was
traveling through southeast Asia in the
region of what is today Myanmar or Burma
Marco Polo had spent much of the last 20
years traveling around the Asian
continent in a remarkable series of
Journeys along the ancient route known
as the Silk Road and recently he had
come into the employment of the Mongol
emperor of China a man named Kublai Khan
impressed by this foreign visitor the
emperor had appointed Marco Polo an
ambassador and he was now traveling
through the forested mountains of
southwestern China that now stand on the
border of Myanmar
he passed through these jungle Hills
thick with bamboo forests and shaded
Groves and then down into a wide river
valley full of wild animals
leaving the province of cardandan
you enter a vast descent which you
travel without variation for two days
and a half in the course of which no
habitations are to be found
you then reach a spacious plane Beyond
this in a southerly direction towards
the confines of India lies the city of
Mee yen
the journey occupies 15 days through a
country much depopulated and forests
abounding with elephants rhinoceroses
and other wild beasts where there is not
the appearance of any habitation
in this country were found many
elephants large and handsome wild oxen
with Stags fallow deer and other animals
in great abundance
but finally after more than two weeks
Marco Polo came across a large city and
it was a city that despite all he'd seen
on his travels still stood out to him
for its size and magnificence a city
where more than 4 000 golden temples
sent their spiers Lancing up into the
afternoon air over the flat pan of the
river valley
after the Journey of 15 days that has
been mentioned you reach the city of
miyan which is large magnificent and the
capital of the Kingdom
the inhabitants are idolaters and have a
language peculiar to themselves it is
related that they're formally reigned in
this country a rich and Powerful monarch
the city that Marco Polo called miyan
had fallen on Hard Times everywhere
homes were abandoned and temples had
fallen into disuse and disrepair there
would have been the signs of War hungry
and displaced people on the streets but
over these sorry sites the golden
shrines of the city towered and attested
to its former magnificence
and of all of these two enormous temples
stood out in particular
when his death was Drawing Near The King
gave orders for erecting on the place of
his internment at the head and foot of
the Sepulcher Two pyramidal Towers
entirely of marble ten Paces in height
of a proportionate bulk and each
terminating with a ball
one of these pyramids was covered with a
plate of gold an inch in thickness so
that nothing besides the gold was
visible and the other with a plate of
silver of the same thickness
around the balls were suspended small
bells of gold and of silver which
sounded when put in motion by the wind
the hole formed a splendid object
[Music]
years later he would return to Italy and
fall on the wrong side of a war between
the city-states of Genoa and Venice and
he would be thrown in prison by the
genoese
he would share his jail cell with a
writer named rusticello de Pisa who was
greatly impressed with Polo's Tales of
his travels
while waiting in prison for the war to
end the pair of them worked to clarify
Polo's memories and write them down in
Vivid detail with what many scholars
consider to be a surprisingly High
degree of accuracy and authenticity
together with the writer rusticello
Marco Polo would become the first
Outsider to write a description of a
city at the heart of an Empire that
today we know by the name Bagan
for centuries it had United the lands of
Myanmar and presided over a boom in art
and architecture constructing one of the
most striking collections of religious
buildings that the world has ever seen
the Empire of Bagan had flourished and
survived and then in a Flash its golden
age had ended its people had left and
its Grand temples had fallen slowly into
ruin foreign
[Music]
my name's Paul Cooper and you're
listening to the fall of civilizations
podcast
each episode I look at the civilization
of the past that Rose to glory and then
collapsed into the ashes of History I
want to ask what did they have in common
what led to their fall and what did it
feel like to be a person alive at the
time who witnessed the end of their
world
in this episode I want to tell one of
the most colorful stories of
civilizational survival the story of the
Bagan Empire of medieval Myanmar
I want to show how this Kingdom rose up
in the irawadi river valley of central
Myanmar and built one of the most
remarkable series of monuments to have
survived anywhere in the world I want to
show what life was like for the people
who lived there and what happened to
cause its sudden and complete collapse
[Music]
the modern country of Myanmar is today
the largest Nation by continuous land
mass in Southeast Asia it's the size of
Texas as nearly three times larger than
the United Kingdom
Myanmar borders India in the west and
China in the East and its lands stretch
between the mountain ranges the arakan
the pagu the chin and the Shan Yoma
between the Bony peaks of these mountain
ranges that run like a series of spines
north to south down the whole country
flow the rivers chindwin schwali namai
and Mali
many of these rivers begin in the
Himalayan glaciers of upper Burma and
all of them flow down through the Gorges
of the high mountains and join the
largest Watercourse of all in a wide and
sinuous flow
this is the Great River irawadi
the name of the erawadi river derives
from the Sanskrit name airavati a
legendary white elephant with four tusks
and the Seven trunks who in Hindu
mythology is the trusted Mount of the
god Indra and it's not hard to see why
the river deserves this Grand and
mythical name
the irawadi River Winds for more than
two thousand kilometers across the dry
zone of Burma through Palm forests and
scrub lands and around Sandy Islands
the river is also one of Asia's widest
and at points during the rainy season it
can swell to nearly a kilometer across
these floods can be so dramatic that for
Millennia the people of Burma have built
houses along the river on top of tall
bamboo stilts thus allow the flood
waters to rise below them
at the end of the river's Journey the
irawadi branches out into a wide Delta
of Mangrove forests marshes and
Meandering streams where it finally
empties into the Southern Ocean
the general center of the river's course
is an arid Heartland that's known as
myanmar's dry Zone since it receives a
relatively small amount of rainfall
every year
the mountains that surround this wide
Basin on three sides soak up much of the
moisture holding back the clouds like a
great wall
but the rain falls instead in the hills
and this rainwater then flows down
through the Great River irawadi
this means that so long as you stay
close to the river the dry zone is
actually never short of water
since humans first arrived in Myanmar
people have flocked to the banks of this
River to make their livelihoods to farm
their rice and to build their towns
[Music]
the earliest cultures we have evidence
for arrived in Myanmar around 11 000 BC
and by about 1500 BC people in the
region were already turning copper into
bronze growing rice and domesticating
chickens and pigs and they would be
among the first people in the world to
farm these animals for food
by around 500 BC iron was being worked
in the region
it's the earliest history the rivers
have also been highways
the people of Myanmar have always built
watercraft often rafts made out of the
strong and light Burmese bamboo that
grows everywhere along stream Banks and
in the lower Hills or more refined
barges made of teak wood
the teak tree has adapted to contain a
large amount of natural oil giving it an
exceptional water resistance
the teak growing in Burma is so abundant
that it has been used to make enormous
constructions like bridges that have
lasted for nearly 200 years
one famous bridge named Ube in spans
more than a kilometer across Tau Taman
Lake and is made up of more than a
thousand Teakwood pillars driven into
the lake bed
the people here even build floating
island Gardens that rise and fall with
the water level and which for centuries
have turned to the surface of the lake
into productive agricultural land
if people wanted to travel South they
could easily float their boats
Downstream but the prevailing winds also
blew south to North meaning that it was
also possible to sail against the
current making travel in both directions
along the river relatively easy
the irawadi river was so conceptually
important to the history of this region
the people in Burma would rarely talk
about the country in terms of North and
South but rather used the words Anya and
akie upstream and downstream
one traditional Burmese poet describes
the coming of summer in the landscape of
the erawadi valley
as the hot season revolts against the
cold in the pattern of contrast the sky
becomes cloudy and winds are hot again
it is summer leaves on trees turn yellow
to fall to show new leaves
stems twist or break yet Sprouts on Tama
trees are now soft greens like parrot
eggs while in summer trees thirst in
Foothills tars and flowers are climbing
Tapia trees if using fragrance mixing
with the wafting Air at Sunset Crow
pheasants are cooing and from afar come
the Cuckoo's notes now and again Thunder
is beating through Heaven's expanses
like lambara and de Indie drums and I oh
I think of the pouring of water on the
Bodhi Tree and of the absent companion
in the Golden Palace of victory
and I am mourned foreign
like many languages in Southeast Asia
the Burmese language has different
levels of register depending on how
polite or formal you need to be and the
land itself has different names
depending on the register you're using
in everyday speech people most commonly
use the name Bama to describe the
country and its people while the grander
and more poetic name is Myanmar
both of these names have been used
alongside each other for centuries
when the country became a British colony
the colonial government used the
informal name Burma which is the name
that British people first heard being
used by Common Sailors and Traders
but in 1989 the military dictatorship
that then ruled the country changed the
name officially to the grander name of
Myanmar because of this complicated
history in Myanmar today the question of
the country's name has deep-rooted
controversies but in this episode I will
follow the example of the majority of
Burmese people and use both names
interchangeably depending on context
foreign
stage that the story of the Bagan Empire
would play out in the dry zone of the
country surrounded on all sides by
mountains and watered by the Great River
Highway the erawadi
for much of this Region's history
whoever controlled the dry Zone
controlled the rest of the country and
so it was also a land soaked in the
blood of conflict
[Music]
there are two major sources for events
in Myanmar during the medieval period
the first of these are the inscriptions
left carved in stone at many temples and
other buildings which Kings left in
order to celebrate their deeds and the
second of these sources is the so-called
Chronicles of Burma
these Chronicles are a diverse
collection of documents written over
many centuries by monks and Scholars on
different materials
some are written on paper made of the
Siamese rough bush tree or paper
Mulberry glued into very long sheets and
folded in a concertina fashion While
others are written on palm leaf or even
carved into stone tablets
the first Chronicle that has survived
was written in the 13th century during
the Bagan era
the so-called mahayazawan or great
Chronicle was completed several
centuries later in the year 1724 and it
was followed nearly a century later by
the yazawan teat or new Chronicle which
attempted to square some of the
contradictions between the Chronicles
and the stone inscriptions as its author
writes in his introduction
there are Chronicles written by ancient
Scholars but in those Chronicles written
by ancient Scholars there are some
matters which do not Accord with the
inscriptions
like many such historical documents
these Chronicles were paid for by Kings
and produced under their supervision and
they are instruments of official
propaganda they are also full of
exaggeration poetic license and
mythology especially in the earlier
reaches of Burmese history they include
truly ludicrous exaggerations about the
size of armies often describing battles
involving tens of millions of soldiers
and they frequently include the colorful
appearances of ogres ghosts ghouls
demons and magicians along with
countless figures from Burmese mythology
but in all their Fantastical
presentation these Chronicles can
combine with official inscriptions to
preserve relatively accurate dates and
events and they also preserve the
folklore and traditional memory of the
people in the year 1829 the king bhagya
Dao of Burma a pointed a committee of
Scholars to write a Chronicle of the
Burmese kings that would act as the
final complete edition
he gathered them in the glittering front
wing of his residence known as the glass
Palace and instructed them to get to
work the king of the law seeing the many
discrepancies and repetitions in the
former Chronicles gave thought to the
matter being convinced that a Chronicle
of Kings should be the standard and not
a thing of conflicting and false
statements he assembled his ministers
and ecclesiastical teachers in the front
Chamber Of The Palace which was
variegated with divers gems and a fit
place for the most exalted personages
and caused the chronicle to be purified
by comparing it with other Chronicles
and a number of inscriptions each with
the other and adopting the truth in the
light of reason and the traditional
books
this document full of tangents and
footnotes would become known as the
glass Palace Chronicle despite its
complicated nature it's a remarkable
text that gives us a real glimpse of how
the people of ancient Bagan felt and
thought about their lives and the world
around them as well as the birth of
their empire
the origins of the people who first
spoke the Burmese language are wreathed
in mystery the Burmese Chronicles claim
a line of Kings going back to the second
century but modern Scholars and
archaeologists consider this to be
extremely unlikely one more plausible
account traces the history of these
people back to the early 9th century and
the powerful Kingdom named nanchao
the power of nanchao ruled over the area
across the mountains to the east in what
is today the lofty province of Yunnan in
western China
for years the kings of nanchao had set
their sights on the rich River Valley of
the erawadi
the year was 8 32. around the world at
this time the Byzantine Empire the last
remaining part of what had been the
Roman Empire was fighting for its life
against increasingly confident Arab
empires inspired by the young religion
of Islam
in the Mayan lowlands of southern Mexico
the last king of the soaring city of
Copan a man named
was commissioning a stone monument that
would never be finished because his
entire Society was collapsing under the
pressures of drought and warfare and the
population was fleeing the city
in what is today France King Pepin the
first of Accutane and his brother Louis
the German revolted against their father
the Frankish Emperor Louis the pious the
son of Charlemagne
and in the mountains of southern China
the armies of nanchao marched out to
conquer the lands of Burma
at that time the society occupying the
dry Zone around the erawadi was a people
who are remembered as the pew
exactly who the Pew were and what they
called themselves we have little idea
it seems they spoke a language of the
sino-tibetan family and lived in a
Loosely connected group of five
city-states in the Valley of the erawadi
their culture was heavily influenced by
trade with India
in the preceding centuries they had
imported Buddhism as well as other
Indian cultural Concepts architectural
Styles and political structures and they
had based their writing system on the
Indian brahmi script
one 9th century Chinese text known as
the Manchu or the book of Southern
barbarians records the Chinese
impressions of this land and the Pew
people who lived there
to the south of yongchang City one first
passes beyond the lands of the Tang
Empire to Phoenix blue jungles then to
vast Skies then to clearings there lie
huge rivers and settlements they live in
multi-storied houses without City walls
sometimes painting their teeth always
dressing in untreated cloth with rat and
worn about their waste red silk cloth
wrapped about their top knot and other
hair hanging behind in a decorative
fashion peacocks nest in nearby trees
and elephants are as large as water
buffalo the locals customarily raise
elephants to till the fields and burn
their dung as fuel
the armies of nanchao marched through
the narrow mountain passes thickly
carpeted with forest and swept through
the Burmese lowlands on a series of
devastating raids taking both plunder
and slaves
in the tenth year of their genuine era
Nan Chao sought out and attacked them on
the 21st day of the 12th month of the
third year of the Xi'an Tong era at the
Cliffs of the Suli River some 2000 to
3000 troops masked according to ancient
sources the nanchao deported many
thousands of the Pew people who lived
and farmed in this fertile Valley and
sent them away into slavery
among the troops of nanchao were a group
of Cavalry Warriors from a people known
as the miyan a small ethnic tribe from
the high plateaus who spoke an ancestor
of what would become the Burmese
language but these troops had dreams of
going their own way and once they had
tasted freedom in the Valley of the
erawadi they had no desire to return to
nanchao
used to life in the Rocky Mountain
plateaus of the north the Arid Plains of
Burma were a familiar ecology to them
and with the native population there
devastated by the nancha raids their
lands were there for the taking
the Myan broke away from the kingdom of
nanchao and decided to settle in this
new land and ultimately they would found
a kingdom there
other historians contest that the
Burmese speakers already existed in the
valley and that they were part of the
piau people and had nothing to do with
the nancha raids
but as with everything in these early
stages of The Chronicles we're left with
a hazy fog of contradictions and
uncertainties and the answer actually
may have been a mix of both
[Music]
on the other side of the world at the
same time see going Norseman from
Scandinavia were arriving in great
numbers on the shores of Eastern England
sometimes as Raiders sometimes as
settlers and sometimes as refugees
and over the next Century they would
come to topple the Saxon kingdoms that
ruled there and as they did so they
would plant a distinctly Norse character
on the people of England and the English
language that emerged from them
I think it's possible that the Burmese
people then settling in the irawadi
valley may have arrived in similarly
complex circumstances and formed a
similar hybrid culture with the people
who lived there
[Music]
with much of this matter concealed in
the fog of History what we can say with
some certainty is that around the year
849 just 17 years after the date given
to the nanchao raids the Mian built a
world Fortress at a place on the Eastern
Bank of the erawadi river
a place that would later come to be
known as Bagan
The Chosen location for the city of
Bagan owed much to the geography of the
land around it it seems to have been
built on the ruins of a previous
settlement belonging to the Pew people
and stood on a sizable Bend in the
Meandering course of the irawadi river
the settlement had easy access to water
and was surrounded by Countryside that
would be the most fertile and productive
of all Myanmar for the next 500 years
[Music]
part of the reason for this was the
Region's violent geological history
around 50 kilometers to the southeast of
Bagan was a great dormant volcano named
Mount Papa this volcanic cone covered in
thick forest and shaded bamboo Groves is
a sacred site but for centuries has been
the focal point of worship for the
people of Burma Southwest of Mount papa
is Town Car Lot or pedestal Hill a
striking sheer-sided volcanic plug which
Rises more than 650 meters above sea
level and where a Buddhist Monastery now
sits towering over the forested
landscape below
Mount Papa has long been believed to be
the home of powerful spirits that the
Burmese call gnats and the worship of
these Spirits has always existed
alongside Buddhist religious practices
in a complex relationship
while this soaring Mountain rising out
of the flat plain has long captured the
imaginations and religious sensibilities
of the people it was also partly to
thank for the success of their society
the ash that volcanoes spew out during
their eruptions is rich in elements such
as iron magnesium and potassium minerals
that are crucial for the healthy growth
of plants when volcanic rock and Ash
weather and leach into the soil these
elements are released and so combined
with the fertility of the silty soil
along the river itself and the plentiful
water supply this meant that the soils
in this region were immensely productive
and the people of Bagan were able to
conduct two Bountiful rice harvests per
year and grow other crops like pulses
Sesame cucumbers and millet
on the spot that they'd chosen for their
new city the Mian built a thick and high
wall out of brick
and they built it according to the
traditions of Buddhist cosmology and
numerology
[Music]
the inner wall of Bagan was broken by
Twelve Gates to represent the twelve
signs of the zodiac with four main gates
at each of the cardinal directions north
south east and west
the world area of the city wasn't huge
little over a square kilometer in fact
but the walls contained only the Palaces
of the Kings and the headquarters of his
administration outside this fortified
Center a sprawling City would soon grow
up around it much of it built out of
teak and bamboo that has left little
Trace in the archaeological record
by the mid 10th Century a king was in
place in Bagan although we don't know
the exact names and dates for these
early Kings 1 9th century Arab traveler
to India and Burma named Suleiman nadui
wrote an account of the powerful Army
that won king of Burma fielded
they said that when he marches to battle
he is accompanied by about 50 000
elephants
he campaigns only in Winter indeed his
elephants cannot stand thirst and so
they can go forth only in winter
they say that in his army even the
washermen amounted between 10 and 15
000.
thanks to the ongoing study of
inscriptions we do know the names of at
least two kings who ruled around the
turn of the first Millennium
and kyong P Min both of whom were once
considered to be legendary by the year
1004 a Chinese Source from the Song
Dynasty Records an ambassador arriving
from what they called the purul Khan
Kingdom which is thought to refer to
Bagan and it seems this Ambassador was
seeking recognition from song China
which was then considered the great
power in the region suggesting that the
kingdom of Bagan was now confident
enough to look outwards and assert
itself to its neighbors
but reliable sources on these early
kings are extremely thin and all mixed
up with Legend
the first king of Bagan who steps out of
the historical record in full color
would not come for another half century
he was long considered the founder of
the Bagan Empire and although we now
know that it was likely in existence for
two centuries or so before his Reign he
is arguably its first great king and
certainly the king who would lead it to
New and glorious Heights
he was a man named Anna urata
[Music]
anaurata's early life was one of
upheaval and family conflict
his father was the king but he had been
a usurper on the throne of Bagan having
overthrown the previous King in a
rebellion and like most usurpers
anarata's father lived in constant fear
of one day being overthrown himself
anurata grew up as a prince in the
palace with his two older Step Brothers
men named kizo and sokate
these brothers were actually the sons of
the previous King but anarata's father
had adopted them and raised them as his
own and so they grew up together
but his older stepbrothers kizo and
socate always treated the younger
anarata as though he were an inferior
something that must have rankled the
young prince
and it's clear that these two brothers
also dreamed of one day reclaiming some
of the glory that their adoptive father
had stolen from them
while he was still a boy anaurata's
treacherous Brothers plotted a coup to
overthrow his now aging father as the
glass Palace Chronicle recalls
[Music]
when kiso and Socrates came of age they
built a pleasant Monastery and said to
King kunsor come and call thy blessings
on the monastery
and the King took no heat nor scrutiny
but hearkened to them and kizo and
Socrates sees the king and threatened
him and made him become a monk and they
spread the rumor far and wide that the
king in his Zeal for Bliss Hereafter had
become a monk
this Palace coup must have scandalized
the Royal Court and despite the relative
commonness of coups of this kind the
historians of Burma are clear in their
view on it the glass Palace Chronicle
recounts how a number of evil Omens
accompanied this shocking Act
about the time of his fall a miracle was
seen in the Pato Pagoda the Friday star
trampled on the Moon the Moon was a full
circle on the second day of waxing the
Earth quaked seven days the water Stood
Still in the river
first the brother named kizo ruled as
king but the Chronicles recall that he
was killed one day by a hunter who
mistook him for a deer
he built a royal box in the marshes of
the children and visited the ten
Villages of bangi hunting deer one day a
hunter lay waiting for famine at the
place where they drank water
the king likewise came to the spot to
wait for deer and the hunter knew not
that it was the king but shot with the
bow and hit him that he died he passed
at the age of 28. about the time of his
death an ogre laughed for a full half
month and threw stones at the palace
after this unfortunate accident the
other treacherous brother Socrates took
the throne and it's perhaps not
unreasonable to wonder whether this
story of the hunter accidentally killing
the King might actually be a polite way
for the chroniclers to get around the
fact that the new king had actually had
his brother kizo assassinated
through all of this upheaval and
treachery the boy anorata seems to have
simply got on with things he was allowed
to keep his Royal status at court and to
live there with his mother and in
exchange he attended to the two kings
who had overthrown his father and taken
away the throne that would one day have
been his but when anarata had reached
the age of 30 King Socrates took things
too far
he referred to an aurata at court using
the word Nita nangmay a compound word
that means something like brother son
confused by this anaurata traveled to
the monastery where his father had been
exiled and asked him what it meant
to the old embittered former King the
meaning of this was clear
socate intended to marry anaurata's
mother
anurata told that word to his father
King kyung bu and his father said
because he wishes to take thy mother
thus he speaks
was exceedingly angry and he begged for
the horse and weapons and gear that
Sakura gave his father
and his father gave him the arendham
alarms the thilaunta sword the ruby ring
and the Ruby hairpin
it's hard to know whether anarata was
truly motivated by his mother's honor or
whether he had been planning this the
whole time and had just now found a
convenient excuse
whatever the case anorato Rose in
Rebellion against his Stepbrother
he fled to the holy volcano Mount Papa
and marshaled his forces there Gathering
Lords and Chieftains who had had enough
of the brothers treacherous Antics then
he marched on the capital of Bagan
the glass Palace Chronicle records what
happened next
now when he had mustered his forces he
marched on Bagan and sent a message to
his brother saying will you give up the
throne or will you do battle and when
Socrates heard the words of his younger
brother he was exceedingly wrathful and
answered his mother's milk is yet wet
upon his lips and he says he will fight
me let all my ministers look on I will
fight him man to man on horseback when
anorata heard his brother's words he was
glad and when the appointed day was come
he took the Lance and soared his father
had given him and mounted the demon
horse and came to the stream of tamati
and socate his brother saw him coming
and went forth to meet him then said
anorata brother you the Elder strike
first
and Socrates thrust at him with his
locks
and it reached not his body but pierced
the pommel of his saddle and when soccer
day saw it he was so afraid and trembled
then said anorata brother your turn is
over now it is mine meet it as best you
can
and he Smoot him and pierced him with
the arena damalance so that it went in
at the front and came out behind and
Socrates horse ran away with him to the
river and there he died
[Music]
this encounter as rendered in the glass
Palace Chronicle feels like something
out of the Arthurian Legends complete
with chivalric duels Legendary Weapons
of great power and the fight to save a
woman's honor we would be foolish to
take it at face value as a historical
Source but it does give us a sense for
the turbulent political landscape of
medieval Myanmar and what must have
seemed like the Clashing of great heroic
forces the stuff of medieval romances of
myth and poetry
with his brother defeated anaurata took
the throne
the chronicle records that anarata was
Riven with guilt over the death of his
brother and attempted to soothe his
conscience with the construction of
great temples and works of
infrastructure throughout the kingdom
anarata could not sleep for full six
months because he had slain his elder
brother
then Sakura visited him with a dream
saying King if thou witch to mitigate
thine evil deed and sinning against thy
elder brother build many pagodas
monasteries and rest houses and share
the merit with thine elder brother
devise thou many Wells ponds dams and
ditches fields and canals
and share the merit with thine elder
brother
archaeological evidence does show that
anarato was indeed a prolific Builder
soon after coming to the throne in the
year 1044 he marched into the north to
secure the northern border and built 43
forts along the irawadi river
the north was traditionally the gateway
to Burma the lands through which all
potential conquerors had previously
marched and so it's clear he was Keen to
secure his land from invasion
King anarata built his network of
fortresses as an armored Corridor that
protected the valuable farmlands of the
north and allowed his armies to move
quickly along well-supplied routes he
also fortified many of the towns in this
region building Strong City walls and
garrisons
while in the north he also built
extensive irrigation canals and improved
the existing water infrastructure to get
the most out of the land's potential and
many of the canals and reservoirs that
he built are still in use today nearly a
thousand years later
having secured the north to his
satisfaction King anarato turned his
attention to the South
the coastal cities of Southern Myanmar
were a clutter of independent
city-states many of which had grown
Wealthy on the traffic of trade that
passed by sea to the lands of India and
China
Passage through the mountains that
surround Myanmar was difficult and so
most Goods that came into the country
flowed through these Port Towns
having the good Farmland was one thing
but if began had to keep paying the
trade tariffs to these wealthy port
cities it could never become the kind of
great power that King anarata clearly
dreamed of
according to the Chronicles he marched
South and first besieged the city of
taton as the glass Palace Chronicle
records although it's worth noting that
in its typically exaggerated style it's
probably multiplying the size of the
army by at least a factor of a thousand
he gathered all his Mighty Men of Valor
and marched by land and water
by water he sent 800 000 boats and 18
million fighting Men by land he made his
four generals March up front while he
marched forth with the main Army in the
rear
his land force it is said contained
eight hundred thousand elephants eight
million horses and 18 million fighting
men it is said that the line of troops
was so long that when the first troops
of the army reached the frontier of that
on territory the rear guard still had
not departed from the capital
seeing as this enormous force would far
exceed the population of Burma today and
would have constituted about a quarter
of the world's total population at the
time we can assume this is an
exaggeration but through exaggeration
the Chronicles make their point the Army
was no doubt impressive
with this Force he laid Siege to the
city of tartan and after Holding Out for
three months the city capitulated
from there an aurata absorbed a number
of the other coastal cities into what
was now becoming a true Empire
by this time the city of Bagan had
earned itself the Sanskrit title
arimadana Pura or the city that tramples
its enemies
linking his Capital to these coastal
cities meant that Bagan was now
connected by sea routes to the great
centers of culture in India and perhaps
most crucially with the island of Sri
Lanka
Sri Lanka is a nation off the coast of
Southern India and for much of its
history it has held on to a distinct
cultural character
World Buddhism in its homeland of
Mainland India had mostly died out by
this point it had survived in Sri Lanka
and this island nation had become the
heartland of an ancient and austere form
of Buddhism known as teravada
these new cultural links would transform
the culture and religion of Myanmar and
bring it into contact with new forms of
religious thought and for King and
aurata freshly returned from the
battlefields of the South they would
provide an irresistible opportunity
that was a chance to take on some of his
oldest Rivals not an enemy Kingdom or
Empire but an institution at the heart
of its own kingdom the Buddhist Church
itself
[Music]
for centuries a strain of Buddhism known
as Ari Buddhism was the predominant form
of religion in Myanmar
Ari Buddhism was a hybrid form of
Tibetan Buddhism and Drew heavily on
traditional Burmese beliefs
as a result their practices were quite
different to how we might picture a
Buddhist monk today
unlike in most strains of Buddhism the
Ari monks grew beards and had long hair
they wore blue black robes died with
Indigo drank alcohol and practiced a
form of martial arts similar to boxing
they rode horses and even occasionally
went to war
they also worshiped the figure of the
Naga a powerful form of snake Spirit
drawn from Hindu mythology and built
statues depicting these in their temples
owing to their long history in Burma the
Ari monks enjoyed enormous power in the
Kingdom of Bagan they owned vast Estates
and held enormous stores of wealth
the mahayazawan or great Chronicle even
records the scandalous claim that the
monks were practicing a version of the
right of Prima nocte or first Knight
taking the virginity of brides before
their wedding nights
from then on the Sons and Daughters of
all starting with and including the king
ministers generals Village
administrators at that time when
preparing to get married must be sent to
the monks Nightfall to give the prime of
their flower of virginity
it was said that at dawn they were freed
and allowed to Wed the king having
matured had become virtuous and he was
disconsolate to hear and observe such
wrongful practices
it's hard to know whether to take this
scholarless claim seriously or whether
it was a later piece of Royal propaganda
designed to discredit these monks but
one thing was for certain the Ari monks
were extremely powerful and King anarata
had long dreamed of crushing their
establishment and remaking the church in
a different image
an image more closely under the control
of the crown
king anorato would find the opportunity
to do this when he met a visiting Sage
named shin arahan
this Shin arahan was from the south of
Myanmar the region anarata had recently
absorbed the sage had traveled in Sri
Lanka and he told King anarato of the
merits of the different branch of
Buddhism practiced there a branch that
claimed to be the closest to the
original teachings of the Buddha this
was the taravata Buddhism incubated in
the grand Sri Lankan cities of
anaradapura and polonarua
this strain of Buddhism emphasizes
priests living simple lives living by
begging not eating after midday refusing
all intoxicants and not even touching
money
considering the seemingly uncontrollable
nature of Burma's Ari monks to King
anarata this must have sounded ideal
the glass Palace Chronicle recounts the
king's conversion as a spiritual
epiphany
the King was full of joy and Rapture and
spoke again in treating him my Lord
preach me somewhat yes but a little of
the law preached by the Lord the master
and shin arahan preached the law
beginning with the things not to be
neglected
then the king's heart was full of Faith
steadfast and immovable Faith sank into
him as oil filtered a hundred times
soaks into cotton a hundred times teased
perhaps King anarata was genuinely moved
by the Sage's teachings but it's clear
he also spotted an opportunity
if he brought this new branch of
Buddhism to his kingdom he could weaken
the hold of the Ari monks
and so King anarata went to war with the
church
first the king went after the Monk's
ability to recruit
he brought in new laws that meant that
common people were no longer obliged to
give up their young children to become
monks as they had been before
next he changed the law to remove the
punishment for those who deserted their
life as a monk as a result many
dissatisfied monks simply hung up their
robes and left to do something else
bit by bit an aurata chipped away at the
Monk's power with every tool at his
disposal
there were of course those who fought
the changes anarata banished thousands
of monks who resisted his reforms many
of these fled to the nearby volcano of
Mount Papa or east into the narrow
forested valleys of the Shan Hills and
while they were never completely wiped
out they would never again wield the
same power in the Kingdom
to celebrate the conversion of his land
and Arata sent an Envoy to Sri Lanka and
asked rather boldly that their most
precious Relic a tooth belonging to the
Buddha himself be sent to Myanmar to be
placed in one of his great temples
the Sri Lankans understandably refused
but at the last moment they remembered
that they had a spare and the envoy was
sent back to Burma with what they were
told was another tooth of the Buddha
like the small fragments of wood taken
from the cross used at Jesus's
crucifixion that showed up in churches
across Medieval Europe teeth of the
Buddha had a way of multiplying in
Southeast Asia according to the needs of
the people
but it was good enough for anarata when
the new tooth Relic arrived in the
capital by boat the king himself waded
out into the river to meet it
[Music]
was an effective ruler but at times he
could also be uncompromising and harsh
well he was often able to achieve what
he wanted in his kingdom he did this
largely at the expense of his popularity
and this is nowhere more apparent than
in the story that is remembered as the
tragic Romance of his son Kian Sita
was a great General and had led his
father's armies into battle many times
and when the people in the region of
pagu complained about Raiders destroying
their homes and stealing their animals
the king sent kiansitter to deal with
the situation
The Story Goes that the prince saw off
the Raiders and the people of pagu were
so grateful that they sent him home with
various gifts for the king Gifts of gold
hairs belonging to the Buddha and a
beautiful young woman named ooh kin
intended to be offered to the King as a
bride
was on the journey home Prince cancer
and ookin fell in love
when anaorata found out about this
Arthurian betrayal he exiled his own son
who was forced to flee across the
countryside of Myanmar and go into
hiding this story with its Forbidden
Love betrayal and dramatic finale has
proved irresistible to generations of
playwrights songwriters and Poets in
Myanmar
But ultimately it seems that this
uncompromising nature would finally lead
to the downfall of King anarata
on the 11th of April 1077 The King was
riding through the outskirts of Bagan on
the back of his elephant
the Chronicles record that a tree spirit
that the king had previously displeased
appeared in the guise of a wild buffalo
and gored him to death and then demons
took away his body
so that it was never found
much more likely is that the king's
unpopularity finally got the better of
him and he was ambushed and killed by a
group of Rivals who ensured that no
evidence remained of their crime
the Chronicles recall his death with
great sorrow
thus this Noble King full of Glory might
of arm and Dominion who for full 33
years of Royal Prosperity had Advanced
the welfare of the religion his own
welfare and that of the generations of
his sons grandsons and great-grandsons
died at the age of 75 about the time of
his death bees claved to the throne door
of the palace an ogre laughed from the
top of the tarabar gate and luster of
the royal sword faded and a vulture
alighted on the palace
after the death of the great king
anarata his sons saulu took the throne
at the age of 26.
although not particularly Young by the
standards of royalty he would soon gain
the title Min Lou Lin or the boy King on
account of his inexperienced and naive
style of ruling
after only five years of mismanaging the
Kingdom he faced a rebellion in the
South among the mon people who lived in
the coastal cities that his father had
conquered
for not the first time the Chronicles
recall a quite unlikely sounding version
of events
in this version of the story The King
saulu lost at a game of dice with one of
his Nobles a childhood friend of his
named Yaman Khan and in a fit of sore
losing rage he dared the noble to rebel
against him
one day the king in Yaman Khan played a
dice and Yaman can won and he rose up
and clapped his elbows
said King Sulu you have won a mere game
of dice and you dare to arise and clap
your elbows
if you are a man Rebel with pegu your
province
in truth as the Yemen can
we Kings said the king
should we utter anything but truth
according to the chronicle Yaman can
promptly returned to peregu and started
a rebellion as the king had suggested
well this account may not exactly be
true it probably does contain some truth
about the character of King saulu who by
all accounts had a petty and childish
nature and seems to have treated the
business of ruling as though it were
little more than a game
now facing an open Rebellion the
childish king saulu turned to someone
that his father had long ago exiled for
the crime of falling in love with a
woman promised to him
that is his half-brother the Romantic
hero of songs and poetry the man named
Kian Sita
came out of Exile and agreed to help the
childish king lead his armies against
the rebellion in the south
but king saulu would prove to have no
better judgment on the battlefield than
off it and he would be fooled One Day by
a devious ploy
encamped when they reached the island of
Pi daughter saying it is too late today
tomorrow we shall fight
then in the dim Moonlight Yaman Khan
came forth and provoked them to do
battle
so they followed and fought without heed
or observation and the King saulu
thinking that an elephant figure sat in
the mud was a real elephant
set forth to fight and the Royal
elephant he was riding fell into the mud
and stuck
and King solu climbed down from his back
and ran and entering a hole in the
Banyan tree in the forest hid there
and his elephant was captured and the
whole Army was despoiled and fled
there was none to stop them
saulu was soon found hiding in the
Banyan tree and was taken into captivity
by the rebel Yaman Khan according to
another slightly Fantastical episode in
the Chronicles saulu did actually have
one chance to escape when the hero Kyan
sitter personally snuck into the enemy
camp to rescue him
but saulu feared that kyonceta secretly
wanted to kill him and he refused to go
with his rescuer
he believed that the rebel Yaman Khan
who had been his friend and who he had
played many games of dice with would not
harm him
[Music]
shoulder sorely thought
kianzita is one whom my father has
injured whom I have injured I fear he
steals me away to kill me but yamankan
is son of my tutor surely he will not
kill me
solu yelled out kianzito is stealing me
kianzita exclaimed then die you fool die
the death of a dog at the hands of these
scum flung him down and ran for his life
he swam across the erawadi and
eventually made back to safety
but like many of his other calculations
saulu's gamble didn't pay off
fearing more Escape attempts Yaman Khan
had the king killed in April of the year
1084.
in the game of life it seems the king's
saulu was always rolling once
after the death of saulu kyansita
continued to lead the Royal armies of
pagan against Yaman Khan's rebellion and
the rebel leader fled south on the River
on his opulent golden barge
onsitter sent a hunter named ya sin to
follow him and to kill him if he could
the chronicle recounts what happened
next
and Yasin the hunter caught him up below
your water and he climbed a fig tree and
uttered lovely notes like the voice of a
bird
when Yaman Khan heard that sound he
opened the door of the golden raft
and not saying
what bird is that uttering notes so
sweet and wonderful
now he had put one good eye and Yasin
the hunter from the place where he
waited peeping drew his bow and shot and
hit the eye of Yaman Khan
and he died
now the once exiled kianseta was the
only person in line for the throne
[Music]
Kian Sita came to the throne on the 21st
of April 1084 and assumed the title SRI
tribuva naditya Dharma Raja which means
something like fortunate Buddhist King
son of the three worlds
in many ways he was the perfect uniting
figure for the country after such a
period of violence and Division
while in Exile from his father he had
lived for seven years in the southern
mon region among those coastal cities
and there he had developed a genuine
love for the mon people and culture
[Music]
invited mon Nobles to court and
appointed them to high positions in the
Kingdom some of whom had been part of
the Rebellion only years before
the result of this generous approach was
a long period of Peace in Myanmar and
with that peace came a period of great
prosperity
during this time the capital city of
Bagan grew to previously unimaginable
size and wealth
the population boomed as a result of the
growing agricultural potential of the
city but Bagan also attracted people
from across the region artists sculptors
Masons Architects monks Scholars and
teachers
we can track the booming of the city in
the ever increasing number of temples
that were built in the 300 years after
the reign of King anarata Each of which
we can reliably date with carbon dating
during this time as many as 4 000
temples were built along with thousands
more brick structures supporting them
many of these temples had vast stupas or
domed shrines at their Center and the
effort and expense of constructing these
must have been enormous
this building effort would have required
an army of Masons and carpenters
plasterers and sculptors gold and
silversmiths either paid in cash or
working in exchange for food animals and
land these artists would have required
the support of an even larger array of
supporting Industries Masons required
brick Builders who required firewood
brought by Lumberjacks and porters the
sculptors of countless statues of the
Buddha needed miners of marble and
dolorite
and elephant trainers to transport the
heavy stone blocks
and all of them needed rice fruit
vegetables meat and game and of course
the alcoholic Spirits brewed from rice
or the foaming toddy made from the
fermented sap of the palm tree
with work to be had in every corner of
the city people traveled for thousands
of kilometers to find employment in the
enormous construction site that the city
of Bagan had become
at one point the glass Palace Chronicle
lists the professions of people who were
deported from a conquered City during
the reign of King anarata and from it we
get a sense of all the ways that someone
could make their livelihood in the city
of Bagan
thereafter he sent away separately
without mixing such men as were skilled
in carving turning and painting Masons
molders of plaster and flower patterns
blacksmiths silversmiths braziers
founders of gongs and symbols filigree
flower workers doctors and trainers of
elephants and horses makers of shields
round and embossed men skilled in frying
parching baking and frizzling yakin
hairdressers and Men cunning in perfumes
odors flowers and the juices of flowers
from the small Fortress Capital that
it's once been Bagon expanded to fill an
area of more than 100 square kilometers
or more than twice the size of ancient
Rome
estimates for the population around this
time range as high as 400 000 people
living in the city alone
during this time many of the largest
temples were constructed and the largest
of all is the temple known as the
Tatiana Temple
consecrated in the year 1144 the vast
spired Pagoda of this Temple Rises to a
height of over 61 meters or more than 20
stories
another temple nearby is called the
Ananda Temple and it rises to a height
of 51 meters
this Temple serves not only as a place
of worship but also as a monastery and a
library the Temple's first and second
floors were used as the residents of
monks while the third floor was used to
hold images the fourth floor was used to
store manuscripts and books and the
fifth and top floor stored the precious
relics
the building of temples in Bagan was
seen as the ultimate form of devotion
that a king could engage in
when one later King allowing situ
dedicated the completing of the shui
gugi Pagoda he spoke the following
prayer in which he envisions the temples
as a kind of grand infrastructure of the
Soul as a bridge across samsara or the
endless cycle of rebirth and towards
Eternal enlightenment
by this abundant Merit I desire hear nor
Hereafter no Angelic pomp of brahmas
surahs maras nor the state and splendors
of a monarch nay not even to be the
pupil of the Conqueror but I would build
a Causeway sheer across the river of
samsara and all folk would speed across
thereby until they reached the Blessed
City
these temples were held in the highest
reverence one of the inscriptions at the
unfinished
temple built some time after the began
era contains the following blessings for
those who respect the sanctity of the
temple as well as a series of blistering
curses against any who damage or
desecrate it
who favors and upholds like me the gift
of faith which I thus offer with all my
heart be he my son grandson or any
future king who comes after me Queens
princes Royal ministers high or low may
he be favored above others with the
wheel of treasure may he be endued like
King mandata with Glory majesty and
power
but whoever spoils even so much as an
oil lamp here may he be oppressed with
the eight dangers that ten punishments
the 32 results of karma the eight
calamities the 96 diseases may he be
suddenly overtaken with a great
Affliction which a thousand doctors may
not Avail to cure having suffered thus
for long generation after generation
when his bodily elements dissolve may he
suffer by Going In and Out Among the
eight Chief hells and the Twelve Minor
hells and the 40 limbos of Yama and
lokika may He suffer with the hosts of
demons Titans and hungry ghosts even if
he survive all these sufferings may he
revisit five thousand times these lands
in the form of a boneless and miserable
creature a ghost a worm a water leech
while Royal annals like the glass Palace
Chronicle are extremely detailed on the
comings and goings of bagan's Kings
Unfortunately they have very little to
say about what life was like for the
average person during this time
for a picture of daily life for the
average person in Bagan we can turn to
the pages of the classical poetry of
Myanmar
Myanmar has had a great poetic tradition
for centuries and the time of Bagan was
no exception many poets flourished among
its scholarly communities in its temples
and Royal courts and the manuscripts
that these Scholars produced were
exceptionally valuable
records show that in the year 1273 a
complete set of the Buddhist texts known
as the tripitaka cost up to 3 000 kiats
or nearly 50 kilos of silver that would
be enough to buy more than 5 000 Acres
of rice land
four large monasteries or 150 slaves
the exceeding expense of these texts
meant that literacy was never widespread
and most common people would not learn
to read or write
one 15th century poet named Shin
maharatatara wrote a poem that describes
the qualities required by a man of
learning
[Music]
if one does not try with the eagerness
of a daring Eagle that firmly catches a
hen if one does not study and Ponder
does not question and does not discuss
and knows only how to read Palm leaves
how can one become a well-known man of
letters like a cat eating a shrimp with
special enjoyment a learner must study
all texts he must become sharp as teeth
of a sore penetrating deeply into all
disgust matters to unravel the subject
from beginning to end without fear like
a lion
one area that these poets can really
educate us about is in the realm of food
a 17th century poet named
gives a description of the diet of an
ordinary farmer who supplements his
meals of rice and Curry with various
kinds of animal life that he finds in
his fields
The Peasant plows his field and in his
rice fields are water-filled holes home
to many small crabs tossing these into
his shoulder basket together with frogs
snails super plants kazoo and kinhon
leaves and pilo all for his Curry
stoopingly he goes back home sweet and
juicy is the curry cooked on arrival and
laid out quickly with Kean Hing and
kiwetna vegetables the rice is hot and
the curry is hot with pungent spices
that make one suck
scooping sizable handfuls bending he
eats surrounded on all sides by his sons
and grandsons
another source of information is the
painted walls of certain temples and
pagodas in Bagan which show us a little
of the city's dress styles too at least
among the wealthy
[Music]
the people's costumes in these paintings
are combinations of Indian and Chinese
cultures they wore long dresses and
shawls with most of the materials made
of silk and cotton both men and women
wore bangles on their wrists and arms
necklaces and foot chains and seemed to
have worn jeweled belts on their waists
one prominent cultural practice among
many ethnic groups in Burma was
extensive tattooing especially of the
legs and this would likely have been
evident on the streets of Bagan
one European visitor in the 19th century
commented on this practice
every male Berman is tattooed in his
Boyhood from the middle to his knees in
fact he is a pair of breeches tattooed
on him
the pattern is a fanciful medley of
animals and arabasks
But ultimately the people who lived out
their countless lives in the streets and
alleys of Bagan farming rice and
cucumbers tending to their animals and
constructing the temples have been
forgotten and it's only the Raging
dramas of the Royal Court that have been
remembered in any true detail in the
coming centuries those dramas would
reach a fever pitch
thank you
throughout his Reign King Kyan sitter
struggled to have a son so much so that
he almost lost hope
without a son to provide a clear line of
inheritance the kingdom could be thrust
into Civil War
when a son was finally born to him in
the year 1090 he was so Overjoyed that
he immediately crowned the baby boy King
and stepped down to serve only as his
Regent
the boy was called situ
Kyan sitter would die 22 years later and
his son situ took the throne with no
opposition
like his father he would be an excellent
ruler in terms of politics and warfare
but it seems he wasn't the best parent
he had several Sons but before they
could come of age it became clear that
for one reason or another his oldest son
was not suitable for the throne
and so situ had him banished
the second son who would go on to take
the throne was a man named naratu and he
has been remembered to history as a
tyrant and a psychopath
when King siddhu finally fell ill in his
old age this impatient son took the
opportunity to speed up his inheritance
now when he reached the age of 101 he
fell grievously sick his son Naruto
removed him from the throne and kept him
within schwego pagoda and the King
recovered Consciousness a while and said
this is not my Palace whose trickery is
this
and the King was convulsed with anger
his whole body burned like fire then his
son Narato thought if the king arises
from his sickness I shall be utterly
destroyed
so with clothes and garment he pressed
down the king
until he died
marathu wanted to take the throne for
himself but there was still the problem
of his banished older brother
he devised a plan to place his brother
on the throne first to make things look
a little less suspicious but of course
he would not sit there for long
when he reached leppen Port narathu
according to the oath he had sworn went
down to the boat and shouldering his
brother's sword he raised and set him on
the throne after his anointing his food
was poisoned and that night he died
[Music]
with all these threats dealt with King
naratu ascended to the throne himself
and he would rule in a predictably
tyrannical style as the glass Palace
Chronicle recalls
King narathu had once been the demon
guardian of a mountain who had shaded
the Lord so he was great in glory might
and Dominion his ministers both great
and small his followers and all the
people stood in fear and awe of him he
raged furiously with wrath and pride the
King was brutal and Savage his Queens
concubines and handmaids stood in fear
and awe of him and loved him not but
hated him and cursed him in their hearts
all the inhabitants of the Kingdom
starved in Toil and sweat and many forts
Villages and domains were ruined
seemingly desperate to assuage his guilt
for his heinous actions naratu
increasingly isolated himself in his
Palace and ordered the construction of
what he intended to be the largest and
most ambitious of all of bagan's temples
known as the Dharma Yankee Temple
but naratu would not live to see this
great Temple completed it's not clear
who gave the order but naratu was in his
Palace one day when he was approached by
a group of eight men dressed as monks
when the man got close enough to the
king they drew their daggers and each
stabbed him when they were sure that he
was dead in a kind of suicide pact they
turned their knives on each other and
themselves as the glass Palace Chronicle
records
they ascended the palace and Drew Nye
The King encircling him under guise of
presenting the conscient nezagrass and
they pierced the king with the sword
until he died thereafter they pursued
the minister the deaca to pierce him but
they could not catch him
then they pierced their own bodies with
the sword and died all eight of them
the reign of King naratu did great
damage to the kingdom of Bagan and
harmed its reputation abroad
but in the end it wasn't tyranny
Rebellion or kingly blundering that
brought down the empire
after several more Royal assassinations
Coos and Throne seizures the kingdom
would eventually return to peace under
the long reign of a king named narapati
situ who would Reign until the year
1211.
but all this time the forces that would
eventually tear this great city of
temples apart were already at work
in fact in an ironic twist of fate it
would be the temples themselves that
would contribute to the gradual
weakening and the eventual fall of this
entire civilization
despite the efforts of King and aurata
to reign in the excessive power and
wealth of the Ari monks the terravada
church that replaced them would soon
become just as wealthy and by the height
of bagan's golden age it would far
surpass the wealth and power that its
predecessors had enjoyed
for the rulers of pagan the church was a
powerful tool for building their own
legitimacy among their subjects
the kings of Burma ruled under the title
Dharma Raja meaning a king who would
uphold the duties of the church
whenever a new King was crowned he would
begin his Reign by lavishing gifts on
nearby religious institutions building
new temples and donating plots of land
to the monks
but it wasn't just the king who
contributed to these institutions
the church also encouraged private
citizens to donate land and money in
exchange for benefits when they were
reborn in the next life one ancient
Burmese poem offers a starkly
transactional approach to these
incentives offering a kind of tiered
system of Rewards
he who gives and urges others to give
things in charity will be reborn Rich
surrounded by numerous attendants and
holding vast possessions
he will be a shining moon in the
Assembly of Men
He Who earnestly encourages others to
give donations freely while himself
offering nothing in future rebirths will
be deficient in material belongings yet
many attendants and relatives sons and
grandsons will be in his Entourage
whosoever neither himself is generous
nor urges others to be will encounter
evil fate after his body's dissolution
never feeling satiated scarcely finding
eating plants showing hunger day and
night he will become a hungry Spirit
meeting all the kinds of misery
foreign
with such punishments awaiting those who
refused to donate to the church in the
next life it's not hard to see why
people donated freely and generously
these donations of gold goods and labor
made the church incredibly wealthy but
it was the donations of land that really
tipped the balance in the Kingdom
anything given to the church was given
forever and so as time went on an
increasingly large amount of the land
mass of Myanmar and much of its
productive Farmland was slowly donated
away piece by piece to the Buddhist
Church
this wouldn't have been so much of a
problem except for one thing that's the
fact that according to a long-standing
tradition the Buddhist Church in Bagan
was exempt from paying all taxes
this meant that these large Temple
Estates ended up acting like tax Havens
today the equivalent of 10 of the
world's wealth is held in tax Havens
where the rich keep their money to avoid
paying tax on it but in some Modern
States like Russia several Latin
American countries like Argentina and in
the oil states of the Persian Gulf the
amount of wealth held in offshore tax
Havens can exceed 60 percent
a state's ability to function is
directly linked to its ability to raise
funds and to Marshal its Collective
resources for the public good
money taken into tax Havens has
effectively left the economy and in
Myanmar between the 10th and the 13th
centuries the situation began to look
similar to some of the modern world's
worst areas for tax evasion
in began by the late 13th century as
much as 63 percent of the Kingdom's land
that had once belonged to the crown as
well as the majority of its gold and
silver was in the hands of the
tax-exempt church
for successive Kings of pagan this
resulted in something of a bind
their entire legitimacy rested on the
system of belief that began and ended
with the Buddhist Church and so the
thought of using any kind of force to
seize Land from the unarmed Buddhist
monks was unthinkable
the church wasn't just a beloved
religious institution it was also the
land's biggest employer and countless
people depended on it for their
livelihood
and so if the Burmese Kings had any hope
of getting their land back they would
have to use the doctrines of the church
against it
Buddhist doctrines in Burma did allow
for a sort of release valve on the power
and influence of the church
monks were supposed to live by the
vinaya or the Buddhist code of conduct
which emphasizes relinquishing yourself
of Earthly possessions
and it was considered the duty of Kings
to periodically Purge the church when it
wandered too far from this ideal if the
church had become too wealthy then by
definition it must have strayed from the
vinaya and so a process called sasana
could begin
[Music]
this was a kind of Inquisition in which
individual temples were inspected and
excess wealth or land could be
confiscated according to a strict
religious code
it was a way for the crown to claw back
some of the wealth it had lost to the
church
but the process of sasana was slow and
often insufficient
once a stage of sosana purifying of the
church was finished often the population
felt newly inspired to donate to their
now pure and righteous church and money
would start flowing back to the monks in
even greater amounts
after a king had purified the church his
descendants would often give even more
lavish donations the moment they came to
the throne in order to increase their
own legitimacy
and so over the centuries the wealth of
the empire of Bagan flowed in only one
direction from the great reservoir of
the royal treasury downhill into the
tax-exempt sector of the religious
establishment the historian Michael aung
twin summarizes the situation in the
following terms
the kingdom of Bagan declined because
the factors that had nurtured it in the
first place became in time forces that
contradicted and destroyed it the seeds
that sowed the destruction of Bagan are
what earlier made its success possible
and the institutions that led to
prosperity and power eventually
involuted and impoverished the state
what had been a blessing became a curse
but because began Society was unable and
unwilling to change what were once
constructive forces when they became
destructive ones the political power of
the dynasty collapsed
by the reign of a king named tilo minlow
who ruled in the early 13th century it's
clear that the Royal treasury was
struggling he was the last king of Bagan
to build any significant temples
although he did so mostly in remote
regions away from the capital
the Kings who followed would be
apparently penniless and no great
constructions would go up after this
period
[Music]
when discussing the collapse of
societies historians often talk about
what they call the remote origins of the
collapse
these are slow broad trends that build
up over time cracks that begin to appear
and wear away at the structure sometimes
invisible and then there's what they
call the immediate Origins this is the
wrecking ball that comes swinging in and
delivers one decisive blow that
reverberates through the cracked and
weakened structure and sends the whole
thing shattering into smithereens
the state of Bagans reduced ability to
Marshal its land and resources was not
fatal by itself but it left it
increasingly vulnerable to outside
events
in the year 1258 a series of rebellions
began in South arakan and mataban and
posed a challenge to the Empire
with as much as two-thirds of its land
held by the church the Bagan State
struggled to fund the military campaign
necessary to contain these rebellions
though it would ultimately bring order
back to those regions after a struggle
of many years it was a clear indication
of the weakened state of the country
but soon an even more terrible threat
began to loom
this was a force of the size and
strength that the people of Bagan had
never encountered before
a force that even now was sweeping
across the Eurasian land mass washing
away Empires that had ruled for
centuries and leaving death and
destruction in its wake
these were the armies of the Mongol
Emperor Kublai Khan
Kublai Khan was a grandson of the great
Mongol warlord Genghis Khan who had
United the step peoples of Mongolia and
led them on a campaign of Conquest the
likes of which the world had never seen
conquering lands from the South China
Sea to the Mediterranean from Siberia to
Afghanistan
Kublai was 12 years old when his
grandfather Genghis Khan died and after
the death of the great Khan the vast
Mongol Empire began to split into
warring rival States
Kublai Khan would find himself at the
head of the Chinese portion of the
Mongol Empire and founded a dynasty
known as the Yuan with his Capital at
Beijing
in just three generations the Mongols
had gone from nomadic Wanderers to
Emperors and over time the Yuan Dynasty
would come to rule over most of
present-day China Mongolia Korea and
Southern Siberia
in the late 13th century at the same
time that the Bagan Empire was
struggling to contain its rebellious
Northern provinces and Claw back some of
its land and wealth from its Church the
emperor Kublai Khan was engaged in an
immense war against his last remaining
rivals in China these were the Southern
Song Dynasty a large Chinese Kingdom
that had until now resisted the advances
of the Mongols
but by the year 1270 the song were on
the ropes
Kublai Khan had blockaded the Yangtze
River cutting off their supply routes
and he was now Keen to encircle and
Destroy any remaining song armies
but he had one problem
there was still a single remaining
Escape Route for the song armies and
that was through the narrow mountain
passes in the southwest of China and
into the lands of Myanmar
if the song armies were able to escape
through the lands of Bagan they could
continue their fight
and so Kublai Khan resolved to bring the
Empire of Bagan under his Sway and close
off the song's final Escape Route
with his forces all tied up in total war
against the song Kublai at first had no
desire for conflict with Bagan
he sent an Envoy to the Burmese court
and demanded that the king there swear
loyalty to him and pay a small tribute
as Mongol tactics went this was about as
polite as you could get
but things would not go according to his
plan
the king of pagan at this time was a man
named naratiyapati
he was a man of overwhelming appetites
who loved his food and drink so much so
that the glass Palace Chronicle records
that he was The Reincarnation of an ogre
who lived on Mount Papa
the Lord had left a prophecy upon the
top of Mount tangvi that the ogre
guardian of the mountain should become
king Thrice in Bagan
even so it came to pass for he became
king once it is said as narathia pate
and because he had become a man from the
state of an ogre he was violent in Envy
proud and wrathful and gluttonous in
eating and drinking
he was great in Wrath haughtiness and
envy exceeding Covetous and ambitious he
had three thousand concubines and Maids
of Honor
if the Chronicles are to be believed
this King narutia Pate also ruled
tyrannically with some of his
preoccupations ranging into the
territory of the bazaar
the king being one who had received the
Lord's prophecy suffered not from any of
the 96 diseases and never so much has
sneezed nor yawned and so none was
allowed to sneeze or yawn in his
presence if anyone happened to sneeze or
yawn he beheaded him
one day a young handmaid in the king's
presence was dearly desired to sneeze
and because she could not refrain it she
put her face to a great jar and sneezed
hoping that the king would not hear but
alas the sound was louder than if she
had sneezed openly and the King asked
what sound is that
it's only through the gentle
intervention of one of his queens that
the unfortunate girl was allowed to
escape with her life
was also given over to boasting
especially about his famous appetite as
one inscription left by him at the
mingalas Eddie Pagoda in 1274 shows
King Nara tihapati supreme commander of
36 million soldiers and who is the
consumer of 300 dishes of Curry daily
enshrined 51 gold and silver figurines
of kings queens Nobles and Maids of
Honor on Thursday the full moon of
casein of the Year 636
and so in January of the Year 1271 a
group of ambassadors arrived in Bagan
from the court of Kublai Khan in Beijing
with the Mongol Emperor's offer
these ambassadors asked to see the
Burmese King narutia party and when they
were let into the throne room they
demanded that the king submit to being a
vassal of the Mongols
this ogre-like King refused the glass
Palace Chronicle remembers this
encounter in dramatic terms and uses the
Burmese name taruk or turk to describe
the Mongol ambassador
the tarok sent 10 ministers and a
thousand Horsemen to demand golden rice
pots vessels of gold and silver gold and
silver ladles because said he they were
once offered by King anarata
furthermore some Chronicles say that
they came demanding a white elephant
the Tariq ambassadors in making demands
showed no due respect nor reverence in
the king's presence
therefore the king commanded
slay these 10 ministers and thousand
Horsemen let none Escape
both Burmese and Mongol inscriptions of
the time indicate that this sentence was
not actually carried out with the king's
advisors perhaps pleading with him to be
rational but it shows the extent to
which the Mongol demands angered this
King naratiapati
back in Beijing we can only imagine the
scenes as Kublai Khan was informed of
this insult
but he was still reluctant to order an
invasion he was battling the last
remnants of the Song Dynasty in the
South and he had just attempted an
ill-fated sea invasion of Japan
capturing the island of tsushima and
attempting to land on the Japanese
Mainland but his ships had been
destroyed in a pair of typhoons that the
Japanese would later name the Divine
winds or Kamikaze and ten thousand
Mongol soldiers had been lost
after this embarrassment Kublai Khan had
no great desire to commit a large number
of troops to a small border dispute with
Bagan
instead he ordered his armies to move
into a wide swathe of contested
Borderlands in the forbidding mountain
ranges between his Empire and Burma
in response the king of Bagan refused to
back down and sent his own armies to
recapture the region backed by a large
force of war elephants
this Burmese Army marched up into the
thickly forested Hills
we can only imagine how the soldiers
felt marching to war with this unknown
enemy of which they must have heard
terrifying Tales
one Burmese poet writing later would
give a description of an army marching
to battle
um
we are not afraid of anything we are
daring and brave ready to sacrifice Our
Lives marching to the Royal City on this
day fixed as the Day of Victory at our
camp in the forest verdant are the
branches full of small flower buds sweet
are the sounds of the military drums and
gongs in the soft evening Twilight just
as Mists and clouds are dispersed so too
must we destroy our enemies
this Army finally met the Mongol
Garrison at a rocky forested Gully known
as the vo Chang Valley
the Explorer and adventurer Marco Polo
by this time was serving as a diplomat
in the court of Kublai Khan he recalls
the force that the king of Bagan sent
so this King prepared a great force and
Munitions of War and he had let me tell
you two thousand great elephants on each
of which was set a tower of Timber well
framed and strong and carrying from 12
to 16 well-armed fighting men
and besides these he had of Horsemen and
a footman good 60 000 men
in short he equipped a fine Force as
well befitted such a powerful Prince
it was indeed a host capable of doing
great things and what shall I tell you
when the king had completed these great
preparations to fight the tartars he
tarried not
they arrived within three days of the
great Khan's host which was then advocan
in the territory of zardandan
it's likely that for many of the Mongol
soldiers this was their first experience
of seeing war elephants fielded in
combat these enormous creatures would
have advanced in a terrifying wall with
their wooden superstructures carrying
archers Marco Polo describes what
happened next
when the king's Army had arrived in the
plane and was within a mile of the enemy
he caused all the castles that were on
the elephants to be ordered for battle
and the fighting men to take up their
posts on them and he arrayed his horse
and his foot the horses of the tartars
took such fright at the sight of the
elephants that they could not be got to
face the foe but always swerved and
turned back whilst all the time the king
and his forces and all his elephants
continued to advance upon them
but the Mongols had learned their
tactics on the vast open steps of
Central Asia and they knew that when an
enemy was too strong to face directly
you could always Retreat and pepper them
with arrows from a distance and that's
exactly what they did
when the tartars perceived how the case
stood they were in great wrath and knew
not what to say or do but their Captain
acted like a wise leader who had
considered everything beforehand they
did as he made them and plied their bows
stoutly shooting so many shafts at the
advancing elephants that in a short
space they had wounded or slain the
greater part of them as well as of the
men They Carried when the elephants felt
the smart of those arrows that pelted
them like rain they turned tail and fled
and nothing on Earth would have induced
them to turn and face the tartars and
then two they plunged into the wood and
rushed this way and that dashing their
castles against the trees bursting their
harness and smashing and destroying
everything that was on them
[Applause]
With the Enemy in disarray the Mongol
Cavalry charged down on them and the
forces of Bagan were scattered
the Mongol Chronicles can barely conceal
their pride at the size of this victory
they record that only 700 Mongol
soldiers were able to defeat a Burmese
Army of 50 000 while only losing a
single soldier but this is clearly an
exaggeration the Burmese Chronicles
perhaps understandably make no mention
of this disastrous campaign
the main force of Bagan had been utterly
defeated on what should have been their
home turf and there was now little
standing between the Mongol armies and
the rich River Valley of the irawadi
the Mongols were quick to capitalize on
their victory
kyong sin the next Fort along the road
fell just six days later on the 9th of
December 1283 and now the Mongol forces
pushed on into the erawadi valley
it's clear from the exaggerated tones of
the Burmese Chronicles just how much of
a threat this Mongol invasion force was
the turkmusted all the parts of his army
to the number of six million Horsemen
and 20 million footmen
and they came marching
the situation clearly looked bleak
ordered two of his generals to take his
remaining forces and fortify the town of
nyasangkian on the crucial river
crossing of the erawadi
coming to nasong town they made it
strong and girded it with Forts and
moats and ditches and fought in their
defense at the river crossing of barmo
for three full months they slew the
enemy and spared not even the feeders of
elephants and horses but slew them all
but when ten Myriad men were dead the
taruks sent 20 Myriad when 20 Myriad
were dead he sent 40 Myriad the King's
Men were weary and foredun and as soon
as the taruks crossed the river nasson
fell
at the news of the fall of nyasang Gyan
the ogre-like king's courage failed him
he fled the city of Bagan and headed to
the South
then the king called his ministers and
consulted with them saying bug untown is
now too narrow for us in depth too
shallow it cannot contain the hosts of
fighting men the hosts of elephants and
horses let us go straight away to the
South and establish a strong town
for this reason king naratiapati would
go down in history in Burma by the name
taruk pie Min or the king who fled from
the Turks
he retreated into the south of Burma and
left the rest of the country leaderless
and in chaos
with no remaining confidence in the king
of pagan to protect them many of the
Empire's provinces simply broke away and
looked to their own defenses
for the next year the king attempted to
negotiate with the Mongol Invaders and
throughout this time the lowlands of
Burma were a battlefield convulsed in a
series of constant running skirmishes
it's not actually certain whether or not
the Mongol forces reached the capital
city of Bagan
according to Burmese sources the
generals that the king had sent to
defend the north seemed to have been
able to slow the Mongol advance and even
repel them about 160 kilometers north of
the capital
some sources claim quite plausibly that
the Mongol soldiers struggled in the
baking heat of myanmar's dry Zone and
suffered from diseases like malaria
which sapped the momentum out of their
campaign
archeology seems to support this story
since on the temples and structures of
Bagan there's little evidence of War
damage or burning
Marco Polo in the court of Kublai Khan
claims that the Mongols did reach Bagan
but explains that they left the temples
intact out of some mixture of respect
and superstition
they marched until they came to the
country and province of Myan and they
did conquer the whole of it and when
they found in the city The Two Towers of
gold and silver they were greatly
astonished and sent word thereof to the
great Khan asking what he would have
them do with the two towers
seeing what a great quantity of wealth
there was upon them
and the great Khan being well aware that
the king had caused these towers to be
made for the good of his soul and to
preserve his memory after his death said
that he would not have them injured but
would have them left precisely as they
were and that was no wonder either for
ye must know that no Tata in the world
will ever if he can help it lay hand on
anything appertaining to the dead
whatever the situation the Mongols had
no interest in a drawn out conflict
by the year 1287 the Mongol Khan had
agreed to a tentative peace
the Burmese delegation formally
acknowledged Mongol power over their
Kingdom and agreed to pay an annual
tribute there was a certain proportion
of the annual agricultural output of the
country
but the agreement broke down only a
month later
in late June the defeated and humiliated
King naratiyapate was returning from the
south traveling north up the river on
his Royal barge to take up his position
as a puppet King in the capital he had
fled years before
but on the 1st of July 1287 King
naratiyapate was intercepted on Route by
his second son the hatu who had him
assassinated
they went Upstream in route and disarray
without Union or order
and when they reached the poor to
promise they had to stop the Royal raft
and put poison in the food he offered it
and said O King eat
but the king knew that there was poison
in the food and he would not eat when
the hatu heard he had caused three
thousand soldiers to go and stand around
the Royal raft with gleaming swords
unshade within their hands
then he took the ring off his finger and
he let fall drops of water over it and
gave it to his Queen
and he made a solemn bow and said
in all the lives wherein I wander
throughout samsara until I reached
nirvana may I never have a son born to
me again and he took the food and ate
and even as he ate he died
the death of this King was the final
death blow for the disintegrating
Kingdom of Bagan
all remaining provinces that had once
been loyal to it now broke away
there was no King at all for the next
two years and when one of naratiyapati's
sons named kiosua did emerge as ruler he
would Reign Over only the diminished and
impoverished city of Bagan itself and he
had virtually no Army
he would be assassinated along with his
son and Heir on the 10th of May 1299
foreign
it was during this time that the
explorer Marco Polo visited the city of
Bagan and saw with his own eyes the
Glorious sights of its temples now
diminished by the years of war
throughout this whole period the Mongols
could have easily moved in to occupy the
territory of Bagan but it seems they had
no interest in doing so
in fact they would send no more
expeditions to restore order
their policy seems to have been to allow
the fragmentation of the Kingdom to
continue and to watch from afar as the
once great power that had challenged
them simply tore itself apart and sank
into irrelevance
one 14th century King named minghy
swasauke wrote a later inscription with
a brief sad note about this time
the Burmese Empire disintegrated because
of internal strife
the collapse of the empire of Bagan was
now complete
[Music]
the area of the city of Bagan would
remain occupied for much of the century
that followed and people would continue
to farm and keep animals in the lands
around the great temples and stupas as
they slowly crumbled beneath the forces
of the elements
other kingdoms would occupy this region
over time some Kings even crowning
themselves at Bagan and giving
themselves the titles of the old
Emperors but the city would never again
hold the same prominence
a smaller number of new and impressive
religious monuments still went up to the
mid-15th century
but after that new Temple constructions
slowed to a trickle and then stopped
entirely
and bit by bit the city fell into ruin
the area of the city of Bagan remained a
pilgrimage site up until the modern day
while Farmers grazed their cattle on the
grasses pushing up through the bricks
pilgrims traveled for hundreds of miles
to visit its unique landscape and see
the awe-inspiring sight of its golden
domes and spiers rising out of the
Morning Mist Of The Flat River Valley
some of the larger and more impressive
temples would even be maintained and
repaired for centuries to come but
thousands of the less famous and more
out of the way temples fell into
disrepair and ruin some disappearing
entirely crumbling into ruined Mounds
swallowed up by the forests
the English writer Williams Somerset
morm who traveled through Burma and
Thailand in 1923 wrote A Memoir of his
travels entitled a gentleman in The
Parlor
in it he writes about how he was
affected by the sight of the ruins of
cities like Angkor
ayutaya and Bagan
in these Eastern countries cities are
founded increased to Greatness and are
destroyed in a manner that cannot but
fill the Western traveler accustomed for
many centuries now to a relative
stability with a certain misgiving
here and there in the jungle Far From
Any habitation you will find ruined
temples overgrown with trees and among
the Dank Verger broken gods and
elaborate bass reliefs as the only sign
that here was once a thriving City and
you will come across poverty-stricken
Villages that are all that remain of the
capital of a rich and Powerful Kingdom
it is a somber reminding of the
mutability of human things
for morm the sight of these ruins
reminded him that the Empire he lived at
the heart of might also one day be
consigned to history
morm writes evocatively of his first
visit to the ruined temples of Bagan as
he approached by Steamboat along the
Great River in awadi
a light rain was falling and the sky was
dark with heavy clouds when I reached
Bagan in the distance I saw the pagodas
for which it is renowned they loomed
huge remote and mysterious out of the
Mist of the early morning like the vague
Recollections of a fantastic dream I do
not know how many pagodas there are at
Bagan when you stand on an Eminence they
surround you for as far as the eye can
reach they are almost as thickly strewn
as the tombstones in a cemetery they are
of all sizes and in all states of
preservation their solidity and size and
magnificence are the more striking by
reason of their surroundings for they
alone remain to show that here a vast
and populous city once flourished today
there is only a straggling village with
broad untidy roads lined with great
trees the Pleasant enough little place
over the next few days morne would
explore the crumbling ruins of these
temples and pagodas and walk among the
dilapidated buildings
and everywhere he found the place
infused with a strange and lingering
melancholy
within the pagodas images of the Buddha
sit in meditation
the gold leaf has long since worn away
from the Colossal figures and the
figures are crumbling to dust
the Fantastic lions that guard the
entranceways are rotting on their
pedestals a strange and Melancholy spot
grass grows in the chinks of the
pavement and young trees have taken root
in the crannies
they are the Refuge of birds
Hawks wheel about their Summits and
little green parrots chatter in the
eaves
the birds were singing noisily in the
trees The Crickets chirped and the frogs
croaked croaked croaked
somewhere a boy was whistling a
Melancholy tune
[Music]
I'd like to end the episode with a
reading from one of the great Poets of
the Bagan period a man named ananta
Surya
ananta Surya was a scholar who served as
the chief minister in the Kingdom of
Bagan under king narutenka who ruled in
the latter half of the 12th century
as a result of a palace coup the king's
brother seized the throne and began
purging the government of those loyal to
the previous King because of this ananta
Surya was ordered to be executed
and just like Marco Polo sitting in his
jail cell in Genoa a century later on
the other side of the world ananta Surya
turned in his time of imprisonment to
writing
while he sat in prison awaiting his
death he wrote The Following poem which
has gone down in history as one of the
most beautiful pieces of writing
produced during the efflorescence of art
and culture that took place during the
Empire of Bagan
it's a poem of loss and forgiveness
about ultimately accepting the fate of
all things to pass into darkness and
dust
as you listen imagine what it would feel
like to walk the emptying streets of the
city of Bagan as its temples crumbled
and grasses grew up through its streets
and homes imagine watching trees push
through the bricks of the temple stupas
and shaded doorways animals running wild
in the streets while the sun set in a
red Haze over the hills and The Poets
sang of the end of days
[Music]
often when one man prospers another must
suffer destruction such is the nature of
things
a courtier's satisfaction in enjoying
kingly confidences in Golden Palaces and
a king's own Good Fortune are merely
bubbles on the surface of a vast ocean
momentary and evanescent
if dictated by Mercy and pity I were to
be released and freed from execution
still I would not escape death
Inseparable am I from Karma
it is the nature of every living thing
to Decay
should I again meet my Lord the king in
one of my future rebirths in the cycle
of samsara begrudging him nothing all I
would do is to lovingly forgive him for
impermanent is my body of blood danger
and death are constant foes
and in this world must ever be
[Music]
thank you once again for listening to
the fall of civilizations podcast
I'd like to thank my voice access for
this episode Jay Forrester Michael
hagian tones
Alexandra Bolton and Paul Cassell
readings in Burmese were performed by
Daniel San
you also to my researcher Brian stulk
if you enjoy listening to fall of
civilizations as a podcast but would
like to see them brought to life on
video you can also find us on YouTube
with state-of-the-art drone photography
3D reconstructions maps and reenactments
I love to hear your thoughts and
responses on Twitter so please come and
tell me what you thought you can follow
me at Paul mm Cooper
if you'd like updates about the podcast
announcements about new episodes as well
as images maps and reading suggestions
you can follow the podcast at fall of
Civ pod with underscores separating the
words
this podcast can only keep going with
the support of our generous subscribers
on patreon you keep me running you help
me cover my costs and you also let me
dedicate more time to researching
writing recording and editing to get the
episodes out to you faster and bring as
much life and detail to them as possible
I want to thank all my subscribers for
making this happen
if you enjoyed this episode please
consider heading onto patreon.com
forward slash fall of civilizations
underscore podcast or just Google full
of civilization's patreon that's
p-a-t-r-e-o-n
for now goodbye and thanks for listening
[Music]
foreign